ayi sabala murāre pāṇijānupracārai:
kimapi bhavanabhāgān bhūṣayantau bhavantau |
calitacaraṇakañjau mañjumañjīraśiñjā-
śravaṇakutukabhājau ceratuścāruvegāt ||1||
ayi sabala murāre	O Thou! Along with Balaraam, O Muraari!
pāṇi-jānu-pracārai:	on hands and knees moving
kim-api	where not also
bhavana-bhāgān	in the various parts of the house
bhūṣayantau bhavantau	adorning, the two of Thou
calita-caraṇa-kañjau	moving Thy two lotus feet
mañju-mañjīra-śiñjā	the pleasing anklet tinkling (sound)
śravaṇa-kutuka-bhājau	eager to hear, the two of Thou
ceratu:-cāru-vegāt	moved about charmingly fast
O Lord Muraari! Thou and Thy brother Balaraam soon moved about on Thy hands and knees. When Thou moved about, Thou looked so beautiful that it was like your movements adorned the various parts of the house. With Thy movements, Thy ankle trinkets tinkled pleasingly, and so to increase the pleasing sound Thou charmingly moved about with more briskness.
mṛdu mṛdu vihasantāvunmiṣaddantavantau
vadanapatitakeśau dṛśyapādābjadeśau |
bhujagalitakarāntavyālagatkaṅkaṇāṅkau
matimaharatamuccai: paśyatāṃ viśvanṛṇām ||2||
mṛdu mṛdu vihasantau-	very gently smiling
unmiṣat-dantavantau	(thereby) revealing the teeth
vadana-patita-keśau	with hair falling on the face
dṛśya-pādābja-deśau	with the lovely sight of the lotus feet
bhuja-galita-kara-anta-	from the arms, slipped down to the hands' end
vyāla-gat-kaṅkaṇa-aṅkau	and marked by the bracelets
matim-aharatam-uccai:	the minds intensely captivating
paśyatāṃ viśvanṛṇām	of the onlookers (and) of all the people of the world
Thy very gentle smile revealed the newly cut teeth. Thy lustrous locks of hair streamed around Thy face. It was a lovely sight to look at Thy lotus feet, and Thy arms, with armlets having slipped down to the wrists which were marked with bracelets. Thou and Thy brother intensely captivated the minds of all the onlookers and also of all the people of the world.
anusarati janaughe kautukavyākulākṣe
kimapi kṛtaninādaṃ vyāhasantau dravantau |
valitavadanapadmaṃ pṛṣṭhato dattadṛṣṭī
kimiva na vidadhāthe kautukaṃ vāsudeva ||3||
anusarati janaughe	being followed by all the people
kautuka-vyākula-ākṣe	with extremely eager eyes (set on Thee)
kim-api	some sort of
kṛta-ninādam	sound (the two of Thou) made
vyāhasantau dravantau	(then) laughed (then) started running
valita-vadana-padmam	(then) turning (Thy) lotus face
pṛṣṭhata: dtta-dṛṣṭī	casting a look behind
kim-iva na	what also did not
vidadhāthe kautukam	(Thou) cause joyful excitements
vāsudeva	O Vaasudeva!
O Vaasudeva! All the people followed Thee with their eager affectionate eyes set on Thee. As the two of Thou ran, Thou made some screaming sounds, then laughed and ran as Thou turned Thy lotus like faces casting a look at the people behind. What incredible joyful excitement Thou caused when Thou did so!
drutagatiṣu patantāvutthitau liptapaṅkau
divi munibhirapaṅkai: sasmitaṃ vandyamānau |
drutamatha jananībhyāṃ sānukampaṃ gṛhītau
muhurapi parirabdhau drāgyuvāṃ cumbitau ca ||4||
drutagatiṣu	in moving fast
patantau-utthitau	falling down, then getting up
lipta-paṅkau	smeared (stained) with dust (mud)
divi	in the heavens
munibhi:-apaṅkai:	by the taintless sages
sasmitaṃ vandyamānau	with a smile (watching the two of Thou) being saluted
drutam-atha	quickly then
jananībhyāṃ sānukampaṃ	by the two mothers with great care
gṛhītau	being picked up
muhu:api parirabdhau	and again and again were embraced
drāk-yuvāṃ cumbitau ca	soon Thou two were kissed also
As Thou two moved fast, Thou fell and got up and were smeared and tainted by mud. The taintless sages in heaven, saw these pranks and smiled at Thee and saluted Thee worshipfully. Then Thou two would be with great care quickly picked up by the two mothers and would be embraced and kissed again and again.
snutakucabharamaṅke dhārayantī bhavantaṃ
taralamati yaśodā stanyadā dhanyadhanyā |
kapaṭapaśupa madhye mugdhahāsāṅkuraṃ te
daśanamukulahṛdyaṃ vīkṣya vaktraṃ jaharṣa ||5||
snuta-snuta-kucabharam-	with overflowing and full breasts
aṅke dhārayantī bhavantaṃ	in the lap holding Thee
taralamati yaśodā	tender hearted Yashodaa
stanyadā dhanyadhanyā	breast feeding (Thee) was extremely fortunate
kapaṭa-paśupa madhye	O Thou! The seeming cowherd boy! In the middle
mugdha-hāsa-aṅkuraṃ	the bewitching smile sprouting
te daśana-mukula-hṛdyaṃ	Thy teeth buds-like charming
vīkṣya vaktraṃ jaharṣa	seeing (Thy) face was filled with delight
The tender hearted Yashodaa with overflowing and full breasts, held Thee in her lap and fed Thee. How extremely fortunate and blessed she was as she did so. O Thou! The seeming cowherd boy! In between the feeding Thou smiled bewitchingly, revealing the charming jasmine buds like teeth, and seeing Thy face she was filled with delight.
tadanucaraṇacārī dārakaissākamārā-
nnilayatatiṣu khelan bālacāpalyaśālī |
bhavanaśukaviḍālān vatsakāṃścānudhāvan
kathamapi kṛtahāsairgopakairvārito'bhū: ||6||
tadanu-caraṇa-cārī	next (when Thou started) on feet walking about
dārakai:-sākam-	with the other boys
ārāt-nilayatatiṣu	in the nearby houses and compounds
khelan	playing
bāla-cāpalya-śālī	(with) the natural childish restlessness
bhavana-śuka-viḍālān	the domestic parrots and cats
vatsakān-ca-	and the calves
anudhāvan katham-api	chasing somehow
kṛta-hāsai:-gopakai:-	by the gopaas who were laughing
vārita:-abhū:	(Thou) were restrained
Next, as Thou started to walk about, Thou played with the other boys in the neighbouring houses and compounds with the natural childlike restlessness. The Gopaas witnessed with joyful laughter as Thou also chased the pet parrots, cats and calves of the household and they somehow restrained Thee from doing so.
haladharasahitastvaṃ yatra yatropayāto
vivaśapatitanetrāstatra tatraiva gopya: |
vigalitagṛhakṛtyā vismṛtāpatyabhṛtyā
murahara muhuratyantākulā nityamāsan ||7||
haladhara-sahita:-tvaṃ	along with Haladhara (Balaraam), Thou
yatra yatra-upayāta:	where-ever went
vivaśa-patita-netrā:-	with helpless (spell bound) watching
tatra tatra-eva gopya:	there there the Gopis
vigalita-gṛha-kṛtyā	neglecting their household duties
vismṛta-apatya-bhṛtyā	forgetting their children and servants
murahara	O Slayer of Mura!
muhu:-atyanta-	again and again, very much
ākulā nityam-āsan	excited always were
Where so ever that Thou went with Thy elder brother Haldhar, the Gopis helplessly and spell bound kept watching Thee. They even neglected their household chores and forgot all about their children and servants. O Slayer of Mura! They were always so very much excited as this happened again and again.
pratinavanavanītaṃ gopikādattamicchan
kalapadamupagāyan komalaṃ kvāpi nṛtyan |
sadayayuvatilokairarpitaṃ sarpiraśnan
kvacana navavipakvaṃ dugdhamapyāpibastvam ||8||
pratinava-navanītaṃ	fresh butter
gopikā-dattam-	by the Gopikas given
icchan kalapadam-	desiring sweet songs
upagāyan	singing
komalaṃ kva-api	charmingly sometimes
nṛtyan	dancing
sadaya-yuvati-lokai:	by the affectionate young women folk
arpitaṃ sarpi:-aśnan	offered butter, eating
kvacana nava- vipakvaṃ	sometimes freshly boiled
dugdham-api-	milk also
apiba:-tvam	drank Thou
Thou would sweetly sing and sometimes charmingly dance about with the desire of getting fresh butter. The young women full of affection gave Thee butter which Thou ate and also gave freshly boiled milk which Thou drank with delight.
mama khalu baligehe yācanaṃ jātamāstā-
miha punarabalānāmagrato naiva kurve |
iti vihitamati: kiṃ deva santyajya yācñāṃ
dadhighṛtamaharastvaṃ cāruṇā coraṇena ||9||
mama khalu bali-gehe	indeed my, in the house of Mahaabali
yācanaṃ jātam-āstām	begging was done, let that be
iha puna:-	here, again
abalānām-agrata:	in front of the ladies
na-eva kurve	I will not do so
iti vihita-mati:	thus deciding
kiṃ deva	did Thou O Lord!
santyajya yacñāṃ	giving up begging
dadhi-ghṛtam-	curd ghee etc
ahara:-tvaṃ	took Thou
cāruṇā coraṇena	by pleasant stealing
In the house of Mahaabali I had to go begging. Let that be. Here now in front of these ladies I am not going to do so again.' O Lord! Thus deciding Thou gave up begging for curd and ghee etc and resorted to pleasantly stealing in clever delightful ways.
tava dadhighṛtamoṣe ghoṣayoṣājanānā-
mabhajata hṛdi roṣo nāvakāśaṃ na śoka: |
hṛdayamapi muṣitvā harṣasindhau nyadhāstvaṃ
sa mama śamaya rogān vātagehādhinātha ||10||
tava dadhi-ghṛtam-oṣe	Thy, in the curd and ghee stealing
ghoṣa-yoṣā-janānām-	in the cowherds' colony's women folk
abhajata hṛdi roṣa:	did not entertain in their hearts, anger
na-avakāśaṃ na śoka:	neither dearth nor sorrow
hṛdayam-api muṣitvā	(their) hearts also stealing
harṣa-sindhau	in the ocean of bliss
nyadhā:-tvaṃ	put them in, Thou
sa	That Thou
mama śamaya rogān	my eradicate ailments
vātagehādhinātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
In the cowherds' colony the Gopikas did not have place in their hearts for either anger or sorrow by Thy stealing of butter and ghee etc. They did not even feel any dearth for its being stolen. It was because Thou also stole their hearts and immersed them in the ocean of Bliss. Such Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou eradicate my ailments.
śākhāgre vidhuṃ vilokya phalamitymbāṃ ca tātaṃ muhu:
saṃprārthyātha tadā tadīyavacasā protkṣiptabāhau tvayi|
citraṃ deva śaśī sa te karmagāt kiṃ brūmahe saṃpata:
jyotirmaṇḍalapūritākhilavapu: prāgā virāḍrūpatām || 11||
śākhā-agre-atha	(at) the branches's front (end) then
vidhum vilokya	the moon seeing
phalam-iti-ambām	fruit it is, (to) mother
ca tātam muhu:	and to father again and again
saṃprārthya-atha	requesting, then
tadā tadīya-vacasā	at that time, by his (father's)saying
prokṣipta-bāhau tvayi	were flung up the two arms by Thee
citram	amazing
deva śaśī sa	deity moon that
te karam-agāt	in Thy hands came
kim brūmahe saṃpata:	what do we say of (Thy) lordliness
jyoti:-maṇḍala-	the luminous aura
pūrita-akhila-vapu:	covering the whole body
prāgā virāṭa-rūpam	attained cosmic form
On the front end of the branch of a tree, watching the moon, Thou asked Thy mother and father again and again for it, saying that it was a fruit. At that time, then, going by Thy father's words, when Thou flung Thy two arms,amazingly, the deity moon came into Thy hands! What can we say of Thy splendorous lordliness? Thy whole body was covered by luminous light and Thou attained Thy cosmic form!
kiṃ kiṃ batedamiti saṃbhrama bhājamenaṃ
brahmārṇave kṣaṇamamuṃ parimajjya tātam |
māyāṃ punastanaya-mohamayīṃ vitanvan
ānandacinmaya jaganmaya pāhi rogāt ||12||
kim kim bata-	what what, indeed
idam-iti saṃbhram	this (is) thus confusion
bhājam-enam	contained him (father)
brahma-arṇave	in the cosmic ocean
kṣaṇam-amum	for a moment him
parimajjya tātam	immersing father
māyām puna:-tanaya-	the Maayaa again, of son's
mohamayīm vitanvan	enchanting, drawing
ānanda-cinmaya	bliss, supreme consciousness
jaganmaya	O Universal form!
pāhi rogāt	save from disease
'What is all this! indeed!' thus Thy father was a vessel of amazement. Thou immersed him in the cosmic ocean for a moment, then again extended Thy Maayaa, and Thou brought about Thy enchanting form of a son. That, Bliss incarnate,Supreme Consciousness, Cosmic form, O Krishna! save me from disease!